# Reflections on COVID relief policies

Thanks to the popularization of the Modern Monetary Theory (MMT), politicians are increasingly aware that a government will never run out of money. Therefore, they can spend as much as they want and be free of any default risk as long as the sovereign nation prints its own currency. 

The financial support provided by the government to combat the COVID crisis is unprecedented. Governments in major countries spent more than 15 percent of their national income to support unemployed workers, families in need, and fiscally stressed businesses. There are both humanitarian and economic justifications for such extravagance. From a humanitarian perspective, governments need to assist those in need; from an economic perspective, these policies will support the aggregate demand, which, in turn, sustains the national output and income.

However, extravagant spending is not without consequence. Governments finance their spending by issuing debt. Regardless of the volume amount, such debt has no difficulty finding a buyer, because the central bank is in the position to buy the debt. The whole procedure is convoluted, but it is essentially equivalent to printing money and giving it to the people. It is common knowledge that printing too much money induces inflation. Now it is the April of this year, with U.S. inflation rate hitting 4.2 percent, inflation is becoming the predominant concern above all. Is it heading towards a desperate stagflation like the 1970s? Is inflation going to eat up all the benefits of relief payments? It is a high time right now to reflect on the helicopter money-style stimulus policies.

**Demand does not create supply**

Roughly a century ago, J.M. Keynes popularized the theory of demand management, which has since become the most influential economic management framework for governments worldwide. Keynes claims that spending has a “multiplier effect.” Because the economy is so interconnected, when someone cuts their spending, this reduces the income of someone else, who then has to cut their own spending, which reduces the income of others. The result is a spending contraction spiral that reduces the overall capacity of the economy. Therefore, in times of recession or economic crises, it is important for the government to intervene to break up the deadly chain of spending contraction by pumping money into the economy. This provides an economic justification for the COVID spending policies. By helping those who lose their jobs and cannot afford the cost of living, the government also helps people who rely on these now-unemployed people’s spending, thus maintaining the wellbeing of the overall economy. 

Keynes famously criticized Say’s Law that “supply creates its own demand.” However, it seems that Keynes ignored another aspect of the truth: demand does not create its own supply, either. It is true that helping people pay for their daily living supports some businesses; however, with so many people staying at home and not working to produce more goods, the supply is shrinking instead of expanding. With increased money spending on the one hand (financed by printing money), and decreased supply on the other, it is not surprising that prices have spiked. 

In general, the Keynes policy implicitly assumes that increasing demand will automatically translate to increased supply. However, this has not been true during the pandemic, when most people are restricted from getting back to work. Even under normal circumstances, the transmission is not as neutral as many economists assume. Our complex economy consists of different producers producing different kinds of goods at the same time. Some of these producers’ capacities are allocated to produce goods and services for direct consumption, while others are devoted to producing means of production, accumulating capital, and R&D efforts. Except in rare depression scenarios, the economy operates near its full capacity with little idle resources. Therefore, allocating more resources to one kind of production entails reducing the production capability for other uses.

The Keynesian policies focus on stimulating spending on consumption goods. Unfortunately, increasing the demand for consumption goods does not necessarily transmit to increased supply and more capital accumulation, sometimes it reallocates resources from producing capital goods to more immediate consumption goods, thereby decumulating capital. The net effect of this process depends on the intensity of the demand, the production structures, and many other factors. Therefore, it is impossible to come to a definite answer. Nevertheless, there is the possibility that such policies “stimulate” the economy as a first-order effect; but the second-order effect is decumulating the capital, reducing the production capacity, deepening trade deficits, accumulating national debt, and weakening the economy overall.

It is hard to tell whether the current fiscal policy will end up happily or badly. But it seems more likely we are not on the healthy track. The massive fiscal spending and money printing do not lead to expanded production capacity and vibrant job demand; instead, they lead to more imports from manufacturing countries, higher inflation domestically, and seemingly more unsustainable debt financing. Therefore, as we saw in the data, the dollar depreciates, the trade deficit worsens, and inflation reaches alarming rates. While the consumption data—especially data related to durable consumption—is recovered quickly, industries that provide business supplies and equipment are lagging behind.

China has done exactly the opposite to combat the COVID recession. The Chinese approach is not to subsidize spending but to reduce costs. The Chinese government does not directly transfer money to those in need. Instead, the government coordinates its state-owned enterprises to defer or reduce the rent or interest repayments. Instead of printing money for people to spend, hoping that demand will drive supply, the Chinese government spends money to upgrade infrastructure and create employment out of investment.

Compared with the demand-supporting approach described above, China’s approach is more productivity-enhancing. While demand is created in the developed world by printing money, China creates the supply. This is why China’s recovery path is the opposite of the United States’ path. China’s industrial production has quickly recovered to pre-pandemic levels, while consumption has lagged behind. 

Keynes attributes the Great Depression to excessive supply coupled with insufficient demand. However, we are probably witnessing now, a different kind of recession: a “glut in demand.” Money-printing relief policies have created an economic dilemma. On the one hand, consumption demand is strong, fueled by money printing; on the other hand, supply is recovering slowly as workers enjoy the government’s generous financial relief and remain reluctant to go back to work. Even worse, as more production capacity shifts to China, less capital is devoted to hire domestic workers. Therefore, the more the government stimulates demand, the less likely the employment rate is to return to pre-pandemic levels.


In the context of disproportionate recovery in the post-pandemic era, we are less likely to see a global rebalance of consumption and saving, nor is it more likely we see an economic decoupling of the United States and China. It is more likely, against the wishes of many politicians, that the world will become more reliant on Chinese production since China’s production capability has nothing but strengthened during the pandemic.

The Chinese approach to combatting COVID is not without flaws. For one, the investment approach requires growing demand to sustain itself. When the global demand decreases as the fiscal is exhausted, the decreased demand will render the invested capacity a glut, similar to the situation experienced by the GFC. Nonetheless, China’s supply-side approach, compared with the demand-side approach adopted by developed countries, shows more resilience and less vulnerability to inflation and debt risk. Thus, China’s approach is a viable alternative to the Keynesian demand management framework and deserves global attention. 


**Who gains, and who loses?**
 
When Keynesian followers cherish the benefit of spending, it is worth remembering Polish economist Michał Kalecki’s famous quote: “Capitalists get what they spend, and workers spend what they get.” Surely, government backstop spending can prevent the economy from further slump, but the benefit is never evenly distributed. During the pandemic, American billionaires saw their net worth increased by over 1 trillion dollars while millions of workers lost their jobs. While millions of workers lost their income and lived on government transfer payments, enterprise profits not only fully recover the pre-pandemic levels but set a record high. 
 
This outcome is not surprising but actually expected when the government pours money into the economy. It is well-known that for a closed economy, government deficit spending increases private wealth because the net financial flows must be balanced to zero (the flow of fund identity). The pandemic relief payments, financed by government debt, when delivered to the population, surely relieve the recipients from payment stress. However, as they spend this money, it flows into the accounts of big business owners, ultimately increasing the wealth of the capitalist class. Whereas the benefit for the working class is transitory, the wealth accumulated by capitalists is permanent. 

Needless to say, our policies—both fiscal and monetary policies—are essentially pro-capitalist, though they are cloaked as protecting the unemployed workers. In our capitalist economy, employment and wages are primarily determined by capitalists’ profit expectations. Over the years, economy regulators learned that in order to maintain full employment, it is necessary to support the business profit and asset prices so that the capital can keep expanding. Meanwhile, the neoclassical doctrine teaches us the benefits of free markets in which the productivity gains incentivized by high profits and low taxes eventually benefit everyone. However, such dreams were shattered by the fact that in the recent four decades, most economic gains are obtained by the rich while the working class barely maintains their living standard after accounting for inflation. 

In Kalecki’s theory, workers can neither decide how much they earn nor how much they consume. The living standard of workers ultimately depends on how many consumption goods the economy produces, and it is the capitalist class, if considered as a whole, that decides the partition of how many consumption goods to produce for workers and how many capital goods to accumulate for themselves. In this regard, workers, even with the help of unions, can negotiate only nominal wages, not real wages. The decision to produce real goods for consumption is ultimately the capitalists’ decision. Without increasing the supply of consumption goods, any nominal wage increases will only be offset by inflation. 

Though the population has received generous subsidies every month during the current pandemic, it would be a fallacy to believe their living standards are improved by the subsidy policy. With millions of workers unemployed, real good supply dwindled, the thousands of dollars workers are being given each month allows them—at best—to sustain their previous standard of living. Nothing real gains are possible without an expansion of real productive capability.

It is said that governments never create wealth, but only transfer wealth. Taxes are one form of wealth transfer. Inflation is another. When government-issued money is met with a limited supply of real goods, inflation is set on fire. We saw prices for necessity goods rose dramatically during the pandemic. Such inflation is like a tax that transfers wealth from those who receive no government payments to those who receive the subsidies. Without relief payments, those who would have been wiped out by the pandemic are the ones with the weakest balance sheets and the lowest cash reserves. The government subsidy changes the natural law of survival and protects the weak at the expense of others. It is hard to tell the net welfare effect is a gain or loss. 

**Inflation in the long run**

Inflation is the primary concern at the moment. Many economists believe the unprecedented extravagant spending will lead to hyperinflation, though the Fed does not share the view. The Fed continues its zero-interest rate and asset purchasing program, believing that inflation is caused by disruptions to the supply chain and that, given the weak demand during the pandemic, the price increase is unlikely to persist. 

Perhaps the Fed is too optimistic to hope that inflation will disappear after the disruption to the supply chain disruption is fixed. As discussed above, the stimulus policy exerts a direct force on consumption goods, meaning that the pressures associated with price increases will transmit along the line of consumption goods to intermediate goods and then to factors of production:  Prices first increase for necessary consumption goods, then intermediate goods close to consumption, and finally to factors of production like land, energy, and materials. As the prices for necessities increase, workers will demand higher wages. Therefore, the unit labor cost will rise. Eventually, all prices will rise to new levels commensurate to the new money created. The current economic situation has not ended the course of price adjustment. We will likely see inflation, especially commodity prices, will remain high for quite some time. 

Nevertheless, it is very unlikely that the pressures of inflation will persist for years like they did in the 1970s because the fundamentals that have caused decades-long deflation remain unchanged. Inflation can persist only if excess demand for goods and labor or supply shortages persist to keep pushing prices up. None of these situations are likely to arise in the post-pandemic world. As labor-intensive industries are moved out of the developed world, there is no persistent increasing demand for labor. In the post-pandemic era, the demand for labor will likely be even weaker than before. On the supply side, developing countries like China will remain cheap goods suppliers, exerting deflationary pressures on daily goods. Unless the United States decides to cut the economic relationship with the largest cheap good supplier, inflation is unlikely to go off the rails in the long run. 

Therefore, we do not need to worry too much about the long-run inflation. A more pressing task is to reflect on the current macroeconomic policy framework to combat the possible long-term loss of jobs and address the ever-enlarging wealth gap and pro-capitalist policies.
