# How Bitcoin and fiat currency coexist


Bitcoin has risen by 7 fold in one year's time. Not only does it reclaim the previous height set  in 2017, but surpass it by trippled values. But this time is differnet. The wide-spread doubt that Bitcoin is a historical bubble has been replaced by institutional-level recognition of its value. Now with the first cryptocurrency exchange, Coinbase, is about to go public in the next week. 
It is becoming a more serious question than ever whether the next generation of money belongs to Bitcoin. My view is that Bitcoin and fiat currency are not necessarily rivalry to each other, but can coexist to serve a better monetary system.  

First and the foremost, there is minimal chance that Bitcoin will replace the fiat currency as the ultimate money or reserve money in our world. Bitcoin is compared to digital gold due to its limited amount of supply. There is little chance that the governments and central banks around the world today would like to return to a system similar to gold standard that we struggled centuries to finally get rid of. When the monetary system is pegged to something as rigid as gold, the elasticity of the system is lost, the policy space of manuvour trickled to tiny.  Governments can no longer run persistent deficit to cover up the loss in a pandemic like COVID-19; central banks can no longer do quantitative easing to bill out problematic financial institutions. -- But, isn't this a desirable feature? Not really. It is only desirable when all parties in the economy play with "fiscal responsiblity". But the nature of human being seems suggest the opposite. A rigid system like the gold standard will not tolerate infinite deficit spending, it will also prohibit any effective response to crisis. When the debt crisis hit, there is nothing policies can do except let the whole economy sink. -- That is, by all means, we would like to avoid. 

There is also little chance that Bitcoin will reshape our game of finance. Bitcoin is not just a token (like gold in kind), but rather a system of payments that embeds a set of rules such that  no one can spend more than he or she owns. This system is hardly more advanced than our financial system today. The financial system of our time is essentially a credit system. The system is mistakenly criticised by many as fraudulence, becaust it creates money "out of thin air". But it is exactly the ability of "creating money out of thin air" that enables so many opportunities that makes our life better be financed in a way that is not bounded by fixed amount of savings. The role of finance is to create assets and liabilities and make sure these assets will eventually worth the value it claims. This involves identification of lucrative investment opportunities and accurately evaluate the risks. This essential function of finance is not challenged by Bitcoin, nor can it be replaced by Bitcoin. 

But our current system does have a problem. Since money can be freely created to whatever amount, it is no longer a safe store of value. This is something Bitcoin can fix. It is easy to believe the falsehood that Bitcoin cannot serve as a safe store of value because it has no intrinsic value. Nothing has intrinsic value unless people believe they have. The value of gold as a store of wealth goes far beyond its decorational utility. Bitcoin is capable of being a store of wealth when most people have faith in it -- Now is the time, because its value is being recognized by most institutional investors. Yet Bitcoin will be a better store of wealth than gold because it can be easily transported. It is a safe store of wealth with the additional functionality of making payments worldwide. 

However, if Bitcoin is a better store of value and capable of making payments, why would people accept fiat money anyway? Well, because fiat money has its advantage like mentioned above -- more policy space and easy credit. Moreover, the state has full power to enforce the use of fiat money, for example the state can mandate its tax being paid by the sovereign currency. It is only possible for Bitcoin to entirely replace fiat money if all people furiously resist fiat money as if it is filthy. But this is highly unlikely. It is more likely that fiat money is still widely accepted as income or payments, but people will convert it to Bitcoin when they want safe store of wealth. 

Therefore, Bitcoin and fiat money can coexist, and they will together make out monetary system better. The price of Bitcoin will stablize as more people are willing to hold it in long term. And the more stablize the price, the better it serves as a store of value. Bitcoin will also be accepted by regulators as they realize that it will not be a thread to the current system. As more and more people store their wealth in Bitcoin, Bitcoin will probably be valued like land or houses -- its value rises as income rises, falls as income falls. Moreover, Bitcoin will offer the opportunity of safe store of wealth equally to all individuals, especially the poor who cannot affort any real estate or invest in the financial markets. This helps reduce wealth inequality. Yet the flexibility of our current monetary system to freely extend credit is not sacrificed. 

The true revolution will probability come from other Blockchain technologies other than Bitcoin. Our business world essentially consists of two parts: (1) a token of value (2) a set of rules to exchange value. Bitcoin offers the first one, but other blockchain technologies such as smart contract offer the second one. Combining these two will possibly revolutionize the way we do business in the decades ahead.