# Assessing the Belt and Road Initiative

The Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), also known as One Belt One Road (OBOR), is
China’s most ambitious global development program under the administration of
President Xi Jinping. Featured by its vast coverage of countries all around the
world — involving more than 60 coun- tries, about two-thirds of the world
population and 40 percent of the global economy — and its ambitious
infrastructure projects, the BRI is "endeavoring to build one of the biggest and
most expensive super-projects the world has ever seen." 

China portraits BRI as "a bid to enhance regional connectivity and embrace a
brighter future". However, the proposal draws as much suspicion and critiques,
if not more than, praise and support. Some critique the initiative as
ill-defined and impractically ambitious. Some warn of the unmanageable debt
burden the project would impose and accuse China of "debt-trap diplomacy". Some
question China’s motivation that is not to promote economic development but to
expand its geopolitical influences.

The purpose of this paper is not to add more rhetoric to the debate, but to
provide evidence as quantitatively as possible to answer the questions: does BRI
benefit the host countries or only benefit China? Is it a win-win strategy or a
win-lose strategy? How much debt burden does China impose on them? The evidence
I find are: (1) Chinese investments have a slightly positive impact on host
countries’ GDP growth; (2) Chinese investments do increase local employment; (3)
some BRI countries do face debt stress, but Chinese loan is not the sole reason.
Finally, I argue that, the reason why the Belt and Road Initiative draws so many
disputes is that China’s approach to de- velopment is fundamentally different
from the official development assistance (ODA) approach adopted by the West.


Full text: [PDF](/rse/bri.pdf)